AI #1803: Contract Commitment dataset extension (#1924)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/contract_commitment/columns/contractcommitmentpaymentmodel.md

# Contract Commitment Payment Model

> Contract Commitment Payment Model defines the financial settlement structure of a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment). It identifies whether the financial obligation is settled via a single upfront payment, distributed recurring charges, or a combination of both over the [contract commitment duration](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentduration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contract Commitment Payment Model defines the financial settlement structure of a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment). It identifies whether the financial obligation is settled via a single upfront payment, distributed recurring charges, or a combination of both over the [contract commitment duration type](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentdurationtype).
```

Stale reference. The column was renamed from ContractCommitmentDuration to ContractCommitmentDurationType.

Contract Commitment Payment Model has three possible values: **No Upfront**, **Partial Upfront**, and **All Upfront**.

* No Upfront denotes that the obligation is settled entirely through recurring charges with no initial payment.
* Partial Upfront denotes that the obligation is settled through a combination of an initial payment and recurring charges.
* All Upfront denotes that the obligation is settled via a single payment at the start of the duration.

## Implementation Context

> * Settled via Upfront: Refer to the [contract commitment start date](#datasets.contractcommitmentdatestart) for the cash event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Settled via Upfront: Refer to the [contract commitment period start](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentperiodstart) for the cash event.
```

Broken anchor. `#datasets.contractcommitmentdatestart` doesn't exist. The relevant column is ContractCommitmentPeriodStart.

## Column ID

ContractCommitmentPaymentModel

## Display Name

Contract Commitment Payment Model

## Description

Defines the financial settlement structure of a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment).

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Dataset         | [Contract Commitment](#datasets.contractcommitment)  |
| Column type     | Dimension      |
| Feature level   | Mandatory      |
| Allows nulls    | False          |
| Data type       | String         |
| Value format    | Allowed values |

Allowed values:

| Value           | Sort Order | Description                                                                                  | Typical Use Case                                              |
| --------------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| No Upfront      | 10         | The obligation is settled entirely through recurring charges with no initial payment.        | Pay-as-you-go Savings Plans or monthly-billed SaaS.           |

> | Partial Upfront | 20         | The obligation is settled through a combination of an initial payment and recurring charges. | Hybrid RIs or EAs with a "Year 1" deposit plus installments.  |

Reviewer 2: Current descriptions for `No Upfront` and `Partial Upfront` use "recurring charges" which implies a specific payment structure and excludes edge cases (e.g., two One-Time payments - an initial and a deferred).

**Note:** If we decide to broaden the definitions to cover edge cases rather than focusing on typical scenarios, the same change should be applied consistently to the intro section.

```suggestion
| No Upfront      | 10         | The obligation is settled entirely through deferred payment(s) (typically multiple recurring charges) with no initial payment. | Pay-as-you-go Savings Plans or monthly-billed SaaS.           |
| Partial Upfront | 20         | The obligation is settled through a combination of an initial payment and deferred payment(s) (typically multiple recurring charges). | Hybrid RIs or EAs with a "Year 1" deposit plus installments.  |
```
